larger meaning. We lose elections and hope for the courts to foil Republican plans. We
lose the courts and wait for a White House scandal.
And increasingly we feel the need to match the Republican right in stridency and
hardball tactics. The accepted wisdom that drives many advocacy groups and
Democratic activists these days goes something like this: The Republican Party has
been able to consistently win elections not by expanding its base but by vilifying
Democrats, driving wedges into the electorate, energizing its right wing, and
disciplining those who stray from the party line. If the Democrats ever want to get back
into power, then they will have to take up the same approach.
I understand the frustration of these activists. The ability of Republicans to repeatedly
win on the basis of polarizing campaigns is indeed impressive. I recognize the dangers
of subtlety and nuance in the face of the conservative movement’s passionate intensity.
And in my mind, at least, there are a host of Bush Administration policies that justify
righteous indignation.
Ultimately, though, I believe any attempt by Democrats to pursue a more sharply
partisan and ideological strategy misapprehends the moment we’re in. I am convinced
that whenever we exaggerate or demonize, oversimplify or overstate our case, we lose.
Whenever we dumb down the political debate, we lose. For it’s precisely the pursuit of
ideological purity, the rigid orthodoxy and the sheer predictability of our current
political debate, that keeps us from finding new ways to meet the challenges we face as
a country. It’s what keeps us locked in -Y΄either/or‘ thinking: the notion that we can have
only big government or no government; the assumption that we must either tolerate
forty-six million without health insurance or embrace ΄socialized medicine.‘
It is such doctrinaire thinking and stark partisanship that have turned Americans off of
politics. This is not a problem for the right; a polarized electorate—or one that easily
dismisses both parties because of the nasty, dishonest tone of the debate—works
perfectly well for those who seek to chip away at the very idea of government. After all,
a cynical electorate is a self-centered electorate.
But for those of us who believe that government has a role to play in promoting
opportunity and prosperity for all Americans, a polarized electorate isn’t good enough.
Eking out a bare Democratic majority isn’t good enough. What’s needed is a broad
majority of Americans—Democrats, Republicans, and independents of goodwill—who
are reengaged in the project of national renewal, and who see their own self-interest as
inextricably linked to the interests of others.
I’m under no illusion that the task of building such a working majority will be easy. But
it’s what we must do, precisely because the task of solving America’s problems will be
hard. It will require tough choices, and it will require sacrifice. Unless political leaders
are open to new ideas and not just new packaging, we won’t change enough hearts and
minds to initiate a serious energy policy or tame the deficit. We won’t have the popular
support to craft a foreign policy that meets the challenges of globalization or terrorism
without resorting to isolationism or eroding civil liberties. We won’t have a mandate to
overhaul America’s broken health-care system. And we won’t have the broad political
support or the effective strategies needed to lift large numbers of our fellow citizens out
of poverty.
