So let’s be clear. The rich in America have little to complain about. Between 1971 and
2001, while the median wage and salary income of the average worker showed literally
no gain, the income of the top hundredth of a percent went up almost 500 percent. The
distribution of wealth is even more skewed, and levels of inequality are now higher than
at any time since the Gilded Age. These trends were already at work throughout the
nineties. Clinton’s tax policies simply slowed them down a bit. Bush’s tax cuts made
them worse.
I point out these facts not—as Republican talking points would have it—to stir up class
envy. I admire many Americans of great wealth and don’t begrudge their success in the
least. I know that many if not most have earned it through hard work, building
businesses and creating jobs and providing value to their customers. I simply believe
that those of us who have benefited most from this new economy can best afford to
shoulder the obligation of ensuring every American child has a chance for that same
success. And perhaps I possess a certain Midwestern sensibility that I inherited from my
mother and her parents, a sensibility that Warren Buffett seems to share: that at a certain
point one has enough, that you can derive as much pleasure from a Picasso hanging in a
museum as from one that’s hanging in your den, that you can get an awfully good meal
in a restaurant for less than twenty dollars, and that once your drapes cost more than the
average American’s yearly salary, then you can afford to pay a bit more in taxes.
More than anything, it is that sense—that despite great differences in wealth, we rise
and fall together—that we can’t afford to lose. As the pace of change accelerates, with
some rising and many falling, that sense of common kinship becomes harder to
maintain. Jefferson was not entirely wrong to fear Hamilton’s vision for the country, for
we have always been in a constant balancing act between self-interest and community,
markets and democracy, the concentration of wealth and power and the opening up of
opportunity. We’ve lost that balance in Washington, I think. With all of us scrambling
to raise money for campaigns, with unions weakened and the press distracted and
lobbyists for the powerful pressing their full advantage, there are few countervailing
voices to remind us of who we are and where we’ve come from, and to affirm our bonds
with one another.
That was the subtext of a debate in early 2006, when a bribery scandal triggered new
efforts to curb the influence of lobbyists in Washington. One of the proposals would
have ended the practice of letting senators fly on private jets at the cheaper first-class
commercial rate. The provision had little chance of passage. Still, my staff suggested
that as the designated Democratic spokesperson on ethics reform, I should initiate a
self-imposed ban on the practice.
It was the right thing to do, but I won’t lie; the first time I was scheduled for a four-city
swing in two days flying commercial, I felt some pangs of regret. The traffic to O’Hare
was terrible. When I got there, the flight to Memphis had been delayed. A kid spilled
orange juice on my shoe.
Then, while waiting in line, a man came up to me, maybe in his mid-thirties, dressed in
chinos and a golf shirt, and told me that he hoped Congress would do something about
stem cell research this year. I have early-stage Parkinson’s disease, he said, and a son
who’s three years old. I probably won’t ever get to play catch with him. I know it may
