Roger Miller's father died when he was only one year old and his mother became sick soon after, so he was sent to live with his uncle in Erick, Oklahoma.
The Tatoeba Project, which can be found online at tatoeba.org, is working on creating a large database of example sentences translated into many languages.
Tom got down on his knees in front of everyone in the restaurant, pulled a diamond ring out of his pocket and proposed to Mary, to the applause of all present.
Tom threw rocks at Mary's window in the middle of the night to get her attention, but he ended up breaking her window instead and Mary's father called the cops.
And the good news is that today the economy is growing again. 
E-cigarettes are being promoted as a healthy alternative to tobacco cigarettes, but health authorities are concerned about the long-term health effects on users.
Though Tom's English seems quite good at times, he doesn't seem to know his limitations and it's impossible to convince him that he's wrong when he makes a mistake.
You can't easily put photos on an iPad from more than one computer. 
A building with high ceilings and huge rooms may be less practical than the colorless block of offices that takes its place, but it often fits in well with its surroundings.
Five tremors in excess of magnitude 5.0 on the Richter scale have shaken Japan just this week, but scientists are warning that the largest expected aftershock has yet to hit.
The more countries a language is spoken in, the less important it is to sound like a native speaker, since speakers of that language are accustomed to hearing various dialects.
After the iron had cooled off, Mary wrapped the electrical cord around the iron, put the iron back on the shelf, folded up the ironing board, and put it away back in the closet.
A mistake young people often make is to start learning too many languages at the same time, as they underestimate the difficulties and overestimate their own ability to learn them.
No matter how much you try to convince people that chocolate is vanilla, it'll still be chocolate, even though you may manage to convince yourself and a few others that it's vanilla.	
We need to uphold laws against discrimination — in hiring, and in housing, and in education, and in the criminal justice system. That is what our Constitution and highest ideals require.
The swimmer, Cindy Nicholas, barely made it ashore at Dover at the end of the exhausting swim, but a spokesman from the Channel Swimming Association announced that she was in very good shape.
There are four main causes of alcohol-related death. 
Tom made the comment so offhandedly that at first it seemed unimportant, but then I saw the tension in his face and his body language and it quickly became clear that it really meant the world to him.
Top-down economics never works, said Obama. 
A carbon footprint is the amount of carbon dioxide pollution that we produce as a result of our activities. 
We recommend adding sentences and translations in your strongest language. 
At a moment when our economy is growing, our businesses are creating jobs at the fastest pace since the 1990s, and wages are starting to rise again, we have to make some choices about the kind of country we want to be.	
Using high heat settings while ironing synthetic fabrics will melt the synthetic fibers and cause visible permanent damage, which often looks like a shiny area where the too-hot iron had the longest contact with the fabric.	
If you want to sound like a native speaker, you must be willing to practice saying the same sentence over and over in the same way that banjo players practice the same phrase over and over until they can play it correctly and at the desired tempo.	
If someone who doesn't know your background says that you sound like a native speaker, it means they probably noticed something about your speaking that made them realize you weren't a native speaker. In other words, you don't really sound like a native speaker.	
