A well-known scientist (some say it was Bertrand Russell) once gave a
public lecture on astronomy. He described how the earth orbits around
the sun and how the sun, in turn, orbits around the center of a vast
collection of stars called our galaxy. At the end of the lecture, a
little old lady at the back of the room got up and said: What you have
told us is rubbish. The world is really a flat plate supported on the
back of a giant tortoise.¡ The scientist gave a superior smile before
replying, What is the tortoise standing on. You’re very clever, young
man, very clever, said the old lady. But it’s turtles all the way
down!

Most people would find the picture of our universe as an infinite
tower of tortoises rather ridiculous, but why do we think we know
better? What do we know about the universe, and how do we know it?
Where did the universe come from, and where is it going? Did the
universe have a beginning, and if so, what happened before then? What
is the nature of time? Will it ever come to an end? Can we go back in
time? Recent breakthroughs in physics, made possible in part by
fantastic new technologies, suggest answers to some of these
longstanding questions. Someday these answers may seem as obvious to
us as the earth orbiting the sun – or perhaps as ridiculous as a tower
of tortoises. Only time (whatever that may be) will tell.  As long ago
as 340 BC the Greek philosopher Aristotle, in his book On the Heavens,
was able to put forward two good arguments for believing that the
earth was a round sphere rather than a Hat plate. First, he realized
that eclipses of the moon were caused by the earth coming between the
sun and the moon. The earth’s shadow on the moon was always round,
which would be true only if the earth was spherical. If the earth had
been a flat disk, the shadow would have been elongated and elliptical,
unless the eclipse always occurred at a time when the sun was directly
under the center of the disk. Second, the Greeks knew from their
travels that the North Star appeared lower in the sky when viewed in
the south than it did in more northerly regions. (Since the North Star
lies over the North Pole, it appears to be directly above an observer
at the North Pole, but to someone looking from the equator, it appears
to lie just at the horizon. From the difference in the apparent
position of the North Star in Egypt and Greece, Aristotle even quoted
an estimate that the distance around the earth was 400,000 stadia. It
is not known exactly what length a stadium was, but it may have been
about 200 yards, which would make Aristotle’s estimate about twice the
currently accepted figure. The Greeks even had a third argument that
the earth must be round, for why else does one first see the sails of
a ship coming over the horizon, and only later see the hull?
Aristotle thought the earth was stationary and that the sun, the moon,
the planets, and the stars moved in circular orbits about the
earth. He believed this because he felt, for mystical reasons, that
the earth was the center of the universe, and that circular motion was
the most perfect. This idea was elaborated by Ptolemy in the second
century AD into a complete cosmological model. The earth stood at the
center, surrounded by eight spheres that carried the moon, the sun,
the stars, and the five planets known at the time, Mercury, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
