pages provide a manifesto for action, complete with charts and graphs, timetables and
ten-point plans.
Instead what I offer is something more modest: personal reflections on those values and
ideals that have led me to public life, some thoughts on the ways that our current
political discourse unnecessarily divides us, and my own best assessment—based on my
experience as a senator and lawyer, husband and father, Christian and skeptic—of the
ways we can ground our politics in the notion of a common good.
Let me be more specific about how the book is organized. Chapter One takes stock of
our recent political history and tries to explain some of the sources for today’s bitter
partisanship. In Chapter Two, I discuss those common values that might serve as the
foundation for a new political consensus. Chapter Three explores the Constitution not
just as a source of individual rights, but also as a means of organizing a democratic
conversation around our collective future. In Chapter Four, I try to convey some of the
institutional forces—money, media, interest groups, and the legislative process—that
stifle even the best-intentioned politician. And in the remaining five chapters, I suggest
how we might move beyond our divisions to effectively tackle concrete problems: the
growing economic insecurity of many American families, the racial and religious
tensions within the body politic, and the transnational threats—from terrorism to
pandemic—that gather beyond our shores.
I suspect that some readers may find my presentation of these issues to be insufficiently
balanced. To this accusation, I stand guilty as charged. I am a Democrat, after all; my
views on most topics correspond more closely to the editorial pages of the New York
Times than those of the Wall Street Journal. I am angry about policies that consistently
favor the wealthy and powerful over average Americans, and insist that government has
an important role in opening up opportunity to all. I believe in evolution, scientific
inquiry, and global warming; I believe in free speech, whether politically correct or
politically incorrect, and I am suspicious of using government to impose anybody’s
religious beliefs—including my own—on nonbelievers. Furthermore, I am a prisoner of
my own biography: I can’t help but view the American experience through the lens of a
black man of mixed heritage, forever mindful of how generations of people who looked
like me were subjugated and stigmatized, and the subtle and not so subtle ways that race
and class continue to shape our lives.
But that is not all that I am. I also think my party can be smug, detached, and dogmatic
at times. I believe in the free market, competition, and entrepreneurship, and think no
small number of government programs don’t work as advertised. I wish the country had
fewer lawyers and more engineers. I think America has more often been a force for
good than for ill in the world; I carry few illusions about our enemies, and revere the
courage and competence of our military. I reject a politics that is based solely on racial
identity, gender identity, sexual orientation, or victimhood generally. I think much of
what ails the inner city involves a breakdown in culture that will not be cured by money
alone, and that our values and spiritual life matter at least as much as our GDP.
Undoubtedly, some of these views will get me in trouble. I am new enough on the
national political scene that I serve as a blank screen on which people of vastly different
political stripes project their own views. As such, I am bound to disappoint some, if not
all, of them. Which perhaps indicates a second, more intimate theme to this book—
