take a deep breath. When people at dinner parties ask me how I can possibly operate in
the current political environment, with all the negative campaigning and personal
attacks, I may mention Nelson Mandela, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, or some guy in a
Chinese or Egyptian prison somewhere. In truth, being called names is not such a bad
deal.
Still, I am not immune to distress. And like most Americans, I find it hard to shake the
feeling these days that our democracy has gone seriously awry.
It’s not simply that a gap exists between our professed ideals as a nation and the reality
we witness every day. In one form or another, that gap has existed since America’s
birth. Wars have been fought, laws passed, systems reformed, unions organized, and
protests staged to bring promise and practice into closer alignment.
No, what’s troubling is the gap between the magnitude of our challenges and the
smallness of our politics—the ease with which we are distracted by the petty and trivial,
our chronic avoidance of tough decisions, our seeming inability to build a working
consensus to tackle any big problem.
We know that global competition—not to mention any genuine commitment to the
values of equal opportunity and upward mobility—requires us to revamp our
educational system from top to bottom, replenish our teaching corps, buckle down on
math and science instruction, and rescue inner-city kids from illiteracy. And yet our
debate on education seems stuck between those who want to dismantle the public school
system and those who would defend an indefensible status quo, between those who say
money makes no difference in education and those who want more money without any
demonstration that it will be put to good use.
We know that our health-care system is broken: wildly expensive, terribly inefficient,
and poorly adapted to an economy no longer built on lifetime employment, a system
that exposes hardworking Americans to chronic insecurity and possible destitution. But
year after year, ideology and political gamesmanship result in inaction, except for 2003,
when we got a prescription drug bill that somehow managed to combine the worst
aspects of the public and private sectors—price gouging and bureaucratic confusion,
gaps in coverage and an eye-popping bill for taxpayers.
We know that the battle against international terrorism is at once an armed struggle and
a contest of ideas, that our long-term security depends on both a judicious projection of
military power and increased cooperation with other nations, and that addressing the
problems of global poverty and failed states is vital to our nation’s interests rather than
just a matter of charity. But follow most of our foreign policy debates, and you might
believe that we have only two choices—belligerence or isolationism.
We think of faith as a source of comfort and understanding but find our expressions of
faith sowing division; we believe ourselves to be a tolerant people even as racial,
religious, and cultural tensions roil the landscape. And instead of resolving these
tensions or mediating these conflicts, our politics fans them, exploits them, and drives
us further apart.
