By the time we pulled into Cairo, I didn’t know what to expect. Although it was
midday, the town felt abandoned, a handful of stores open along the main road, a few
elderly couples coming out of what appeared to be a health clinic. Turning a corner, we
arrived at a large parking lot, where a crowd of a couple of hundred were milling about.
A quarter of them were black, almost all the rest white.
They were all wearing blue buttons that read OBAMA FOR U.S. SENATE.
Ed Smith, a big, hearty guy who was the Midwest regional manager of the Laborers’
International Union and who’d grown up in Cairo, strode up to our van with a big grin
on his face.
-Y΄Welcome,‘ he said, shaking our hands as we got off the bus. ΄Hope you’re hungry,
’cause we got a barbecue going and my mom’s cooking.-Y‘
I don’t presume to know exactly what was in the minds of the white people in the crowd
that day. Most were my age and older and so would at least have remembered, if not
been a direct part of, those grimmer days thirty years before. No doubt many of them
were there because Ed Smith, one of the most powerful men in the region, wanted them
to be there; others may have been there for the food, or just to see the spectacle of a U.S.
senator and a candidate for the Senate campaign in their town.
I do know that the barbecue was terrific, the conversation spirited, the people seemingly
glad to see us. For an hour or so we ate, took pictures, and listened to people’s concerns.
We discussed what might be done to restart the area’s economy and get more money
into the schools; we heard about sons and daughters on their way to Iraq and the need to
tear down an old hospital that had become a blight on downtown. And by the time we
left, I felt a relationship had been established between me and the people I’d met—
nothing transformative, but perhaps enough to weaken some of our biases and reinforce
some of our better impulses. In other words, a quotient of trust had been built.
Of course, such trust between the races is often tentative. It can wither without a
sustaining effort. It may last only so long as minorities remain quiescent, silent to
injustice; it can be blown asunder by a few well-timed negative ads featuring white
workers displaced by affirmative action, or the news of a police shooting of an unarmed
black or Latino youth.
But I also believe that moments like the one in Cairo ripple from their immediate point:
that people of all races carry these moments into their homes and places of worship; that
such moments shade a conversation with their children or their coworkers and can wear
down, in slow, steady waves, the hatred and suspicion that isolation breeds.
Recently, I was back in southern Illinois, driving with one of my downstate field
directors, a young white man named Robert Stephan, after a long day of speeches and
appearances in the area. It was a beautiful spring night, the broad waters and dusky
banks of the Mississippi shimmering under a full, low-flung moon. The waters
reminded me of Cairo and all the other towns up and down the river, the settlements that
had risen and fallen with the barge traffic and the often sad, tough, cruel histories that
had been deposited there at the confluence of the free and enslaved, the world of Huck
and the world of Jim.
